---
title: Mary Stuart, play of the century (literaly)
date: 2021-02-03
author: Maitreyee Joshi
summary: 
tags:
  - drama
---


The production of Mary Stuart by Fredrich Schiller directed by Antonio Ocampo-Guzman is a play about the rivalry between Mary Queen of Scots and her cousin Queen Elizabeth I. The play is a collection of linear episodic scenes set during the reign of Elizabeth I. The setting of the play is ambiguous with out of timeline references such as bombs and sheriffs. The plot of the play revolves around Elizabeth's impending decision of Mary's fate post her conspiring to overthrow Elizabeth. The production employs various elements of theatricalism in set design, sound and lighting, costume and dialogue to depict this clash between two sisters. It borrows Brechtian techniques of set design, sound effects and fourth wall to shake the audience to the reality of the play and confront them with the unjust nature of lustful power. It also employs expressionist and Artaudian techniques for lighting, costume and dialogue to create a stylized atmosphere to make the audience sympathize with the interiority of characters and shock them with the unsetting familial war. 
Meeting of Elizabeth and Mary combines various theatrical elements to create a defining moment of confrontation in the play. The scene begins with white bright lights and wind gushing; this sound effect of a possible storm with bright lights create an unnatural contrasting effect. It puts the audience in expectation of confrontation with the bright lights creating a cold feeling. The Queen's arrival confronts the viewer with two clashing perspectives in one frame. The Artaudian use of symbolical and striking costumes immerses the audience into the main characters and their natures. The costume for actors, other than the two sisters, is black clothes, with appropriate minimal accessories. It also includes a hint of red if they allied to Elizabeth or white if they are allied to Mary. For example, Mary's agent, Mortimer, wears black clothes with a cream undershirt. This costume choice blurs everyone else and maintains the spotlight only on Elizabeth and Mary. Queen Elizabeth's hunting attire with a whip instantly creates a power difference when seen next to pure cream-coloured Mary. Mary's dress, along with her bible and cross are symbolic of her purity. While Elizabeth's costume shows her as a hunter and Mary her prey, making the audience sympathize with Mary. 
Both the Queens talk directly to the audience, breaking the 4th wall to convince them of their sides. This Brechtian technique creates a sense of courtroom inviting the audience to use their reason and act as a jury deciding on the rightful heir. The style of dialogue furthers this air of the courtroom. The Artaudian dialogue fluctuates between narrative monologues and crispy rebuttals. This technique pulls the audience out of the scene and into the characters life. When Mary talks about her innocence, it is easy to be swayed by her words, but the back and forth makes it murky to know the truth of past events. But due to the power dynamic created by the costumes, it is convincing to sympathies and root for Mary. 
The movements of actors on stage are also vital in swaying the audience's opinion. Mary's submissive posture through kneeling shows her defeat to Elizabeth, which is strengthened by Elizabeth circling her like a hunter with her whip. But unexpectedly this dynamic is flipped when Mary grabs her whip and duels with her. The staging of the fight is essentially like a dance where Elizabeth's primary weapon, whip, is caught by Mary. It relates to how Mary has used Elizabeth's most precious lover, Earl, as her way to halt her death sentence. The audience is questioned who Mary is, and the feeling of confusion arises from a sudden change of a character's nature. The sound effects and lighting changes strengthen this. The lights under the stage create a sense of intense vibration, which paired with the red-tinted lights confront the audience with a horrifying act of violence between two cousins. The sound of people murmuring, and voices intensify and showcase Mary's ambition and Elizabeth's powerlessness. This expressionistic technique of using lighting to showcase characters inner thoughts invites the audience to experience the characters true nature and suffering. 
Mary's death scene uses theatrical techniques to convey the end of the powers struggle between Mary and Elizabeth. The unit set along with minimum props lends itself for a brilliant split stage scene. This Brechtian technique of minimalistic staging with levels forces audiences to recognize the reality of this play and the reality of Mary's seemingly unjust but sure death. The lack of props such as a guillotine or jail walls in Mary's world or lack of throne or bedchamber in Elizabeth's world create an abstract sense of place for her death and uncover underlying elements of theatre production. It makes the audience desensitized to Mary's death because the set lacks any indications of her agony. It implores the viewer to focus on the uncovering of events rather than mourning for Mary's death. During this scene, Elizabeth's inability to hear her sister, and Mary's and Leicester's ability to do the same creates an imaginary or dreamlike state. It also symbolizes her inability to see the truth of her sister's innocent. This expressionist technique of distorting the real world also reflects Mary's failure to make her sister believe her as though she is not able to hear Mary. It pulls the audience into Mary's suffering and contrasts with the previous technique of making them reason about Mary's death. 
The change in Mary's costume from cream colour gown to red shows her departure to from her old self onto the afterlife. It also symbolizes Elizabeth's red washing her over as she has won the fight with Mary's death. It creates a sense of finality in Mary's end for the audience. The sound effect of a clock ticking in the background reminds the audience to the deadly wait of impending death. It also creates alienation by this Brechtian technique where the audience recognize there is no clock on the stage, and it is happening as a sound effect, but it draws them in even more as it suggests a parallel time in both the scenes. It also draws them out of the dreamlike state caused by Mary being able to talk and see Elizabeth and makes them ponder over ethicality in politics. This theme builds on the current events that are causing the audience to question the government's abuse of power. 
The emotions for Mary's death are evoked as an aftermath of her death. The play uses Artaudian techniques to disgust the audience by showing her bloody head. This shocking and grotesque prop makes the audience drown in the sorrow of her death.  The departure of all Elizabeth's trusted advisors and her denial of responsibility for Mary's death escalates this sorrow. Elizabeth's cream-coloured clothes remind the audience of Mary. It also contrasts with Elizabeth's colourful clothes that showed her nobility and authority and suggested a loss of her power. The dim lighting after news of Earl's departure draws the audience in for the last reckoning of Elizabeth. As the Queen walks towards a corner, a sudden light change to spotlight her embraces the audience into Elizabeth's inner state of being at the "edge", as shown by her movement. The sound effect of a shooting arrow is sudden and unclear, followed by a blackout. This sound effect pulls the audience out from Elizabeth's inner state to the end of the play, where the audience deliberates on did anyone win? 
Through theatrical techniques such as breaking the fourth wall, minimalistic set, symbolic costumes and dreamlike lighting, the production of this play, in no small extent, conforms to the form of theatricalism. It uses elements from works of Artaud and Brecht complementarily to enable the audience to understand the entanglement that extends beyond just the plot and into the narrative. This production took the famous story of Queen Mary and Elizabeth. It used this form to uncover it in a distinctive setting with an abstract set allowing for a more profound expression of the internal emotion of the characters which aid in audience's discovery of the ethics of power.
